---
layout: post
title: Things in Jars – Jess Kidd
cover: leafs
categories: review
---

> All well and good creating a sewerage system that will be the envy of the civilised world, but should one really delve into London’s rancid belly? London is like a difficult surgical patient; however cautious the incision anything and everything is liable to burst out. Dig too deep and you’re bound to raise floods and bodies…

This is exactly what happens when Bridie Devine digs and delves into the belly of the London underworld of 1863. A child is reported missing, abducted, and so Bridie – a fine detective with a cool head on her shoulders – must poke around in the world of medical curiosities, to save the child from being made into a public spectacle or worse.

One of the things that struck me when I received the book was its gorgeous cover based on William Morris’s Seaweed design (a subtle hint to the reader as to what to expect). Of course, we all know we should never judge a book by its cover but in this case I can honestly say that the contents of the novel were just as breath-taking. With a fluid, easy mix of prose and poetic imagery, Kidd draws you into the plot from the first sentence: ‘As pale as a grave grub she’s an eyeful.’ The phrase’s assonance and alliteration helps with its cadence, making it a pleasantly musical read, and we’re treated to this kind of writing throughout. It’s never too heavy or over-written, though, so it doesn’t interfere with the pace, which is quick and steady.

Events happen within a relatively short timeframe but there are chapters from the past laced between the present, offering the reader glimpses into previous happenings of several of the characters; these add to the understanding of motivation and also make for an extremely satisfying ending.

The Victorian world of science and medicine is (I find) a mesmerising subject, and Kidd’s research into its curiosities mixed with legend makes for some fascinating details. Bridie has more than a smattering of medical knowledge, having been a doctor’s protégé, and at one point disguises herself as a gentleman to gain entry to the medical halls to watch a procedure on an anaesthetised patient. The doctor apparently travelled the world and ‘died a hundred deaths for science’, bringing back innovative knowledge. It’s an interesting comparison to her first operation, which involves a man suffering from a compound fracture – in a surgery sans anaesthetic, the patient passes out from the pain under the knife. In terms of the more curious, on being called to look at a skeleton in a crypt and discovering the infant cradled in its mother’s arms has unusual features (no spoilers!), Bridie warns the curate to keep it to himself as ‘London has a taste for aberrations.’ Such aberrations have a tendency to be studied, sealed in jars (specimens ‘of moments long gone’), which can then be stolen and passed around to find the highest bidder. Medical and criminal sometimes walk hand in hand in this novel and the medical backdrop is essential to plot.

Kidd also writes a range of characters that stick in your mind and heart for a long time after. Naturally, there’s Bridie with her ‘wild, dark tornado of a mind’, her green eyes and ‘biblical temper’, and her habit of smoking a pipe that is usually filled with an especially pungent blend (‘simultaneously bracing and dulling’). She ‘has a talent for the reading of corpses: the tale of life and death written on every body’, which is fortunate due to the novel’s regular appearance of dead bodies. The beauty of getting to know Bridie lies in the eking out of personal details, so as much as this is a tale of mystery to be solved by Bridie, it is also a tale of Bridie’s own mystery: what secrets lie in her past? She’s an absolute delight to puzzle out and get to know.  

Then there’s her loyal companion and housemaid, Cora Butter, who is a tough giant of a woman Bridie rescued from a travelling circus; Ruby Doyle, deceased boxer, ‘a circus to the eye’ with his top hat, unlaced boots, and shifting tattoos, is her very protective sidekick ghost; an eccentric vicar who delivers sermons to a congregation of assorted woodland creatures in the chapel; and even the city of London itself sort of becomes a character, there is such care in its wonderful descriptions: ‘…below her, in the acidulated smoke atmosphere, London glimmers’ and Bridie’s part of town is treated to a particularly condemning description concerning the many foul odours and cholera; later on, ‘[t]he Thames picks up pace, rising again; she sweeps along with such ferocity that mud-larks don’t dare step off the bank and watermen suck air in through their teeth and shake their heads. They will not set foot on water that lashes and boils in temper.’

Strewn throughout is a dancing, gentle sense of humour, which is used impeccably to lighten an otherwise dark novel but which never diminishes the sense of danger. To give an early example, one of Bridie and Ruby’s exchanges at her home includes the question: ‘Why are you here, Ruby Doyle?’ To which Ruby replies: ‘There’s no life at all in that chapel-yard.’ Now, how can you not fall in love with a ghost like that?

*Things in Jars* is one of the most entertaining and well-written books I’ve read. It really is a page-turner, with surprises and twists sinking their hooks in you so that you read way past your bedtime. I would highly recommend it to anyone but especially to those interested in a romp through detective/mystery fiction and those who have a penchant for poetic, playful language.

*First published by Canongate, 2019*
