---
layout: post
title: Hamnet – Maggie O’Farrell
categories: review
cover: shakespeare
---

> They cannot both live: he sees this and she sees this. There is not enough life, enough air, enough blood for both of them. Perhaps there never was. And if either of them is to live, it just be her. He wills it. He grips the sheet, tight, in both hands. He, Hamnet, decrees it.

It opens in 1596 with the son of a well-known Stratford writer seeking help for his twin sister, who has contracted the bubonic plague. One will die within the week, creating a void in the Shakespeare household. His name, however, will live on for centuries, immortalised as one of the most notable plays in history.

Names here are important. Apart from the change of one letter in Hamnet’s name, we see O’Farrell choose Agnes instead of Anne, while the famous writer is not named at all; he is instead defined by his role within the family, i.e. the father of the three children, or the husband of Agnes. This is a choice that deliberately puts him in the background so that we can focus on the usually overlooked members of the Shakespeare family.

It is tempting to say that the title is off-key, as we do see Elizabethan country life more from the mother Agnes’s perspective, but – trying to come up with a different title – I think it is actually the only title it could have. It is Hamnet and his absence around which the plot revolves, the fine thread weaving the family together and which unravels after his death.

Hamnet is an active, intelligent child but ‘he has a tendency to slip the bounds of the real, tangible world around him and enter another place’, often earning him a scolding from his pragmatic grandmother and belligerent grandfather and whippings from his schoolmaster. He is also deeply sensitive, particularly towards Judith, his twin sister, and keenly feels a sense of failure when he cannot find an adult to tend to Judith in her hour of need. It is this depiction of Hamnet, on the cusp of his teenage years, with his sense of responsibility that makes his loss so traumatic.

As already mentioned, a lot of the perspective is through Agnes’s eyes, giving her a voice she has not been afforded by history. We see parts of her own childhood as well as meeting her husband-to-be and the births of her children. The nearby forest evokes fairy tale-like imagery as Agnes remembers her mother’s cottage on the edge, full of herbs and flowers for medicines; she listens to the bees, strongly connecting her with the earth. It is suggested that through Agnes the Bard gains much of his knowledge about plants and falconry.

The omniscient narrative technique allows O’Farrell to have some fun with history. Of course there are parts we don’t know (even how Hamnet died is a mystery) but it is this flight of fancy that gently prods us to wonder. In this story, the plague is brought to Stratford via a monkey originating in Alexandria and a flea ‘intent on its survival and success in the world.’ The flea and its descendants unwittingly embark on an epic odyssey by sea to Sicily, Barcelona, Porto and London. Imagining these tiny details is one of the most inspired aspects of this novel.

O’Farrell’s prose can occasionally wander into the realm of over-writing but it possesses a gorgeous dreamlike quality and a rhythm I suspect is influenced by Shakespeare himself. Yet you don’t have to be a fan of Shakespeare to enjoy this; she is careful to avoid overusing archaisms that would confuse a reader.

For me, the one fly in the ointment is not in the novel itself but in the author’s endnote of the first edition. O’Farrell writes that she had been intrigued by Hamnet since school and states that ‘his burial is listed but not the cause of his death. The Black Death or ‘pestilence’, as it would have been known in the late sixteenth century, is not mentioned once by Shakespeare, in any of his plays or poetry.’ Here, I must take issue. Even if we eliminate such phrases referring to ‘plague’ in Shakespeare (‘A plague on both your houses’, _Romeo and Juliet_), as it could be construed as vague (a plague of what? Locusts? Frogs?), there is still the explicit reference to the pestilence. In Act 5, Friar Lawrence is told by a fellow clergyman what happened to the letter he wrote in order to make his plan known to Romeo:

> Going to find a barefoot brother out  
> One of our order – to associate me  
> Here in this city visiting the sick,  
> And finding him, the searchers of the town,  
> Suspecting that we both were in a house  
> Where the **infectious pestilence** did reign,  
> Sealed up the doors, and would not let us forth  
> 
(_Romeo and Juliet_, V. ii. 5 – 11, my emphasis)

However, this is a side note and does not in any way detract from the quality of writing or from the plot itself.

Overall, the novel is beautifully written and seemingly effortless, like a swan gliding through water. Characters are drawn tenderly and the real beauty lies in O’Farrell’s skill of reimagining a young Elizabethan boy’s life, domestic life in a small town, the sympathetic portrayal of the relationship between husband and wife, and the profound insights on how grief can affect an entire family. And this is a theme which resonates with humanity whichever century we’re living in.

_First published by Tinder Press, 2020_
